---
title: "Bread of Heaven"
featured_image: /images/Coriander.jpeg
date: "2024-09-29"
bibliography: Messages.bib
---

## Reading

[Numbers 11.4-15](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Numbers+11%3A4#cv)

## Good advice

I once had the good fortune to meet someone named [Ellis Potter](http://ellis-potter.com/):

> Mr Potter, a native Californian now residing in Switzerland, is a former Buddhist monk who became a Christian under the influence and ministry of the late Dr. Francis Schaeffer. Mr Potter's dramatic conversion came about as a direct result of several intense, personal discussions with Dr. Schaeffer during the turbulent seventies.

Recently, Ellis Potter said this:

> The sermon of Peter at Pentecost is a good model.  A sermon should proclaim Christ and invite people to believe in Him.  It should explain Scripture and connect the Old and New Testaments.  It should comfort those who need comforting and rebuke those whose behavior is unchristian.  It should tell stories to illustrate its points. It should apply Scripture to contemporary life and teach people how to live and think as followers of Jesus.  This kind of message is good, rich and nourishing food.  If you are a preacher, preach like this to bless your people.

This seems like good advice so here goes.

## Today's reading

The reading from the Numbers is one of the lectionary readings for today. You might know that the lectionary is an ancient tradition that says what to read on particular days. It really is ancient, possibly going back to the second century (i.e. some time between 100 and 200 AD). You have a choice of readings, and I've chosen this one about Moses. It shows Moses at the end of his tether and also tells us about *manna*.

## The Exodus

When the sons of Israel (i.e. the twelve tribes descended from Jacob's sons) came out of Egypt, they didn't go straight to the Promised Land but instead spent forty years wandering around in the wilderness.

Please tell me: what are some of the things that you remember happened during their time in the wilderness?

## A cloud by day and a fire by night 

One of the things that happened was that they were lead around by God. Here is what it says in the Book of Exodus:

> The LORD went before them, by day in the form of a pillar of cloud to show them the way, and by night in the form of a pillar of fire to give them light: thus they could continue their march by day and by night. The pillar of cloud never failed to go before the people during the day, nor the pillar of fire during the night.

[Ex 13.21-22, Jerusalem Bible]

So they were shown the way by a cloud and a light that never failed them. 

Can you think of anything in the New Testament relating to clouds and light? 
There is that time when Jesus took Peter, James, and John up a mountain then was transformed before them so that his clothes became dazzling white. Then Moses and Elijah appeared and started talking to Jesus. Then a cloud appeared and a voice from the cloud said *This is my Son -- listen to him.* Then they saw no one, except Jesus. [Mark 9.2-8](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Mark+9%3A2#cv) 

There is also that time when Jesus said:

> I am the light of the world; anyone who follows me will not be walking in the dark; he will have the light of life.

[John 8.12 JB](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Exodus+13%3A21#cv)

For context, Jesus said this when he was arguing with the religious authorities, who by then wanted to do away with him. It was during the [feast of tabernacles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sukkot), which is when the people went up to Jerusalem and stayed in makeshift huts to remember when God made them live in huts in the wilderness.

Jesus says he is the light of the world in the context of a festival that remembers Israel's time in tents. One would not be wrong to understand that Jesus is hinting that *he* is the timeless pillar of light who still goes ahead of Israel.

There is another way in which Jesus is the light, and that is when he restores sight to the blind. Chapter 4 of Luke's Gospel tells us that Jesus began his mission by reading from the Book of Isaiah:

> The Spirit of the Lord is upon me because he has anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor

> he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted

> to preach deliverance to the captives and recovery of sight to the blind

> to set at liberty those who are bruised

> to preach the favorable year of the Lord.

[Luke 4.18-19, Authorized Version]

Those who have suffered through my previous messages will know about [chiastic structure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chiasmus), where the first and last lines of a passage have a common theme, as do the second and second last, and so on. This structure emphasizes the central theme, in which case the heart of the matter when Jesus announces his mission is this:

> to preach deliverance to the captives and recovery of sight to the blind.

Deliverance of the captives is what God did when he set the Israelite slaves free by bringing the ten plagues upon Egypt. Recovery of sight to the blind is what Jesus does when he opens our eyes and also when he lights our path. (By the way, the *favourable year of the Lord* refers to the Jubilee, a system whose purpose is to ensure that none of the Israelites ends up in perpetual slavery.) There is much to say on Jesus opening our eyes. John's account of the man born blind dwells on this. I hope to write a message about that one day.

## Water from the rock

Moving right along, another thing God does for the Israelites is to provide them with water during their trek through the wilderness. You can read about it at [Numbers 20.1-13](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Numbers+20%3A1#cv). It's just like the reading we heard before -- the people say they would rather be dead than be in this terrible place, Moses takes it to God, and God provides in a way that only God can. It's also where Moses does something wrong. God says to him straight afterwards, *Because you did not believe that I could proclaim my holiness in the eyes of the sons of Israel, you shall not lead this assembly into the land I am giving them.* No one is quite sure exactly what Moses did wrong, but we are told it is to do with unbelief.

Does the New Testament have anything to say about water? One place that stands out is John's account of when a woman met Jesus at a well. Jesus says, *Give me a drink.* The woman says, *You're a Jew and I'm a Samaritan and you're asking me for a drink?* He says, *If you knew what God is offering, you would ask me for a drink of running water.* She says, *Where's your bucket?* He says, *Anyone who drinks the water I give will never thirst again.* She says, *Give me some of that.*

She then went to her people saying, *Come and see a man who told me everything I ever did; I wonder if he is the Christ?* According to the Eastern Orthodox church, the woman's name is [Photina](https://orthodoxwiki.org/Photine_of_Samaria), which means *little light*. They also call her *equal to the apostles*.

There's another place where John talks about Jesus and water. It's at the same feast of tabernacles when Jesus said *I am the light*. John says,

> On the last day, the most important day of the Festival, Jesus stood up and said at the top of his voice, 'If anyone is thirsty, let them come to me and have a drink. For the person who comes to faith in me, just as the Scripture passage said, "Rivers of running water will flow from within them."' (He said this about the Spirit, whom those who had come to faith in him were about to receive...)

[John 7.37-39a, Under the Southern Cross]

You might know that the word for *Spirit* is also the word for *breath* in Greek and also in Hebrew. Just as air, and water, and food are essential for physical life, so the Spirit, and Water, and Bread of Heaven are essential for everlasting life.

## Bread of Heaven

This brings us to the Bread of Heaven. What is it?

When the Israelites first saw manna they said, *What is it?*:

> When the sons of Israel saw it, they said to one another, “What is it?” For they did not know what it was. And Moses said to them, “It is the bread which the Lord has given you to eat.

[Ex 16:15 NASB](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Exodus+16%3A15#cv)


That is what *manna* means in Hebrew: *What is it?* (which is also Heaven)



The chiastic lens might also be applied to the Lord's prayer:

> Our Father, who is in heaven, hallowed be your name

> your kingdom come, your will be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven

> give us today our daily bread

> forgive us our sins, as we forgive those who sin against us

> and lead us not into hard testing, but rescue us from evil.

[Luke ???]

If this is so then God's hallowed name is associated with rescuing us from evil, and God's kingdom is associated with forgiveness of debts. The central point -- the heart of the matter -- is this:

> Give us today our daily bread


in which case the heart of the matter is this: *Give us today our daily bread*.



## Check list

* proclaim Christ
* invite people to believe in him
* comfort those who need comforting
* rebuke people whose behaviour is unchristian
* tell stories to illustrate its points
* apply Scripture to contemporary life
* teach people how to live and think as followers of Jesus

## Acknowledgments

Bible readings are from:

* [Authorized Version](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King_James_Version)

* [Jerusalem Bible](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jerusalem_Bible)

* [New American Standard Bible](https://www.lockman.org/new-american-standard-bible-nasb/)

* [Under the Southern Cross: The New Testament in Australian English](https://www.amazon.com.au/Under-Southern-Cross-Testament-Australian/dp/1490854037), translated by Richard K. Moore.

I rely on the [Crosswire Bible Tool](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp).

I lifted the picture of coriander from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriander).

