---
title: "What should we be doing?"
featured_image: /images/Teaching.png
date: "2024-11-10"
bibliography: Messages.bib
---

Matthew's Gospel ends with Jesus giving his followers a job:

> All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go, therefore, make disciples of all the nations; baptise them in the name of the Father and the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and teach them to observe all the commands I gave you. And know that I am with you always; yes, to the end of time.

[Matt 28.18-20 JB]

What should we be doing? What does it involve? Let's look at a few places where Jesus gives us some hints.

## The mission of Jesus

Jesus announced his mission by reading from the Prophet Isaiah:

> The Spirit of the Lord has been given to me, for he has anointed me.

> He has sent me to bring the good news to the poor,

> to heal the broken-hearted,

> to proclaim liberty to the captives,

> and to the blind new sight,

> to set the downtrodden free,

> to proclaim the Lord's year of favour.

[Luke 4.18-19 JB]

Something called *chiastic structure* happens in the Bible. It's a ring-like arrangement where the beginning corresponds to the end, the bit after the beginning corresponds to the bit before the end, and so on. If this part of Isaiah is chiastic then bringing good news to the poor corresponds to proclaiming the year of God's favour (see the Jubilee in Leviticus chap. 25), healing the broken-hearted corresponds to setting the downtrodden free, and proclaiming liberty to the captives goes with new sight for the blind. 

Chiastic structure helped listeners break a speech into chunks because speakers would start and finish the chunks with similar phrases. (Not many could read back then. The reason so many can read today is because of public education, an idea with Christian roots.) This structure also helped listeners know what was being emphasized, because that bit was said right in the middle. Accordingly the emphasis is on proclaiming liberty to the captives and new sight to the blind.

This is not to say that the rest is less essential. *People do not live on bread alone but on every word that comes from God's mouth.* Every word in Jesus' mission announcement deserves a close look. (I use [Crosswire](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Luke+4%3A18#cv) to look up words and go to [Perseus](https://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=afesin&la=greek#lexicon) to study their meanings.) To give one example, the fourth line (*to set the downtrodden free*) could also be translated as *to send out the broken with forgiveness*. The word *Apostle* comes from the word *to send out*. I think of Peter when I see this line. An Australian theologian named Francis I. Andersen once said:

> Everything is a gift, suffering the holiest of all: and the healing of all hurts is to be found in the Body of One who was broken, the only *pharmakon athanasius.*

(*pharmakon athanasius* means *undying remedy*.)

In the past some Christians like Wilberforce and his friends in the Clapham Sect had a good track record on proclaiming liberty to the captives. They dedicated their lives to abolishing slavery, reforming the penal system, and many other good works. Around the same time a Christian named Thomas Lucas established the *London Society for Teaching the Blind to Read* where blind people were taught to read using an embossed shorthand system he invented.

What are we doing now? Jesus said, *anyone who carries out God's wishes is my brother or sister or mother* [Mark 3.35 USC]. Proclaiming liberty to the captives and new sight to the blind encompasses more than the physically bound and blind. It is an agenda to set people free from whatever holds them captive (e.g. debt) and whatever keeps them in the dark (e.g. listening to people who don't care about them). Christ's mission statement is a divine mandate to work for freedom and enlightenment.

## Being a blessing

The next piece is from the beginning of the *Sermon on the Mount*, what's known as the *Beatitudes*:

> How happy are the poor in spirit; theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

> Happy the gentle: they shall have the earth for their heritage.

> Happy those who mourn: they shall be comforted.

> Happy those who hunger and thirst for what is right: they shall be satisfied.

> Happy the merciful: they shall have mercy shown to them.

> Happy the pure in heart: they shall see God.

> Happy the peacemakers: they shall be called sons of God.

> Happy those who are persecuted in the cause of right: theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

> Happy are you when people abuse you and persecute you and speak all kinds of calumny against you on my account. Rejoice and be glad, for your reward will be great in heaven; this is how they persecuted the prophets before you.

[Matt 5.3-11 JB]

(I had to look up *calumny*. It means *false accusation of a crime or offense, maliciously made or reported*.)

Most of the people listening to the Sermon were the poor of the land, who knew what it was like to live in economic, social, and spiritual poverty. (Earlier, Peter had said, *Leave me, Master, for I am a sinful man* [Luke 5.8 USC]. I like to think that Jesus was looking at Peter when he said *Blessed are the poor in spirit.*) Not many of the listeners could read or write. At John 13.13 Jesus admits he is a teacher. It might be that Jesus the teacher arranged the Beatitudes so that his audience could remember them.

One way to read this passage is as a series of couplets -- pairs of phrases that say similar things. The first pair is *happy are the poor in spirit* and *happy are the gentle* while the last two are about being persecuted. The only problem is that there are nine Beatitudes, and two doesn't go into nine. Well it does if you set apart the middle one as special: *happy are the merciful: they shall have mercy shown to them*.

The Beatitudes are not only instructions on what to do but also prophecies about what to expect when we try to do what is right. You will mourn, you will be persecuted, and you will be slandered; but you will also be rewarded by God. Our Teacher makes mercy central and we become a blessing by doing likewise.

## How should we pray?

What is prayer? I don't know, but I do know that Jesus says anything we ask for in his name will be done. Praying in the name of Jesus is not tacking his name on the end of my prayer for a red Ferrari. Instead, it is getting my agenda in line with his agenda, seeking the spread of God's kingdom on earth. This brings us to his prayer, the one he taught later on in the Sermon on the Mount:

> Our Father in heaven,

> may your name be held holy,

> your kingdom come,

> your will be done on earth as in heaven.

> Give us today our daily bread.

> And forgive us our debts,

> as we have forgiven those who are in debt to us.

> And do not put us to the test,

> but save us from the evil one.

This might have the same kind of structure as seen in the Beatitudes: four couplets with the middle one set apart. If so then *Our Father* goes with *hallowed be your name*; *your kingdom come* goes with *your will be done*; God forgiving us goes with us forgiving others; and avoiding hard tests goes with saving us from the evil one. In the middle is *Give us today our daily bread.*

Amazingly, Jesus teaches people to call God *Father*. Back then they were told not to say *the name* for fear of breaking the commandment not to utter his name to misuse it. The chiastic ring structure links God's good name with delivering us from evil. It also links the progress of God's kingdom with forgiving debts (whether economic, social, or spiritual).

The central point is, *Give us today our daily bread.* That *daily* word is actually a mystery. It is only found twice in the Greek texts of the ancient world. The two places where it occurs are in the Lord's Prayer in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke. The word is variously translated as *daily*, *essential*, *necessary*, *next day's*, *lasting*, and *eternal*. Jesus may well mean *manna*, the bread from heaven that sustained Israel through its wanderings in the wilderness. Jesus said, *I am the bread of heaven*. The heart of the Lord's prayer might just be saying that we can only bring about God's kingdom by leaning on our risen Saviour.

## Acknowledgments

Bible verses are from the Jerusalem Bible (JB, 1966) and Richard K. Moore's translation of the New Testament into Australian English titled *Under the Southern Cross* (USC, 2014). The image of Jesus teaching is from *Bible History: Containing the Most Remarkable Events of the Old and New Testaments* (New York: Benziger, 1904).
