---
title: "Sacred life"
featured_image: /images/Jesus_with_the_teachers.png
date: "2024-12-25"
output: word_document
bibliography: Messages.bib
---

Near the end of the Book of Hebrews it says,

> Through him then, let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of lips that openly identify with his name. But don't neglect to do good and to share, for God is pleased with such sacrifices. 

[Heb 13.15-16 USC]

## Today's lectionary readings

Today is the *First Sunday after Christmas Day* in the church calendar and the readings for today are the following:

* [1 Samuel 2.18-20, 26](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=I+Samuel+2%3A20#cv)

* [Psalm 148](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Psalms+148%3A1#cv)

* [Colossians 3.12-17](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Colossians+3%3A12#cv)

* [Luke 2:41-52](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Luke+2%3A41#cv)

Thank you to our reader for reading the two New Testament readings. Did you notice my bad style in putting *read* in the same sentence three times? There's a reason for that, which I'll come back to later.

We didn't have Psalm 148 but we did just sing the *Canticle of the Sun*. Francis of Assisi composed this song in the year 1224 AD while recovering from an illness in a place that had been built for him by the [Poor Clares](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poor_Clares). There are a lot of similarities between Francis' hymn of praise and Psalm 148.

## Lent to God

The reading from Samuel is about a boy who became a priest. Speaking of Samuel, I would like to thank our minister Samuel for putting together today's service.

The Samuel of the Bible was a miracle baby. You might remember the story. Samuel's mother, whose name was Hannah, couldn't have children. Her husband had another wife who could have children. Every year the whole family would go up to the sacrifice at Shiloh. Hannah would only get one piece of meat because she had no children. To make things worse, the others would taunt her about it. The final straw was when her husband Elkanah said, *Why are you crying? Why aren't you eating? Why so sad? Aren't I more than ten sons to you?* This drove Hannah to bitter and tearful prayer. She asked the Lord of Hosts for a son. She also made a vow, promising to give the son as a gift to God.

The rest is history. She had a boy and honoured her promise. Hannah took Samuel up to Shiloh and left him there when he was a toddler. There are similarities between Hannah's story and the story of Mary, the mother of Jesus. One of the things they have in common is that they both composed songs praising God because of their miracle babies. Both songs include a part about God raising the poor from the dust and assigning them a place of honour.

This is how Samuel became a boy priest. Here is what the reading from First Samuel says:

> Samuel was ministering before the LORD, a boy wearing a linen ephod.

> His mother used to make for him a little robe and take it to him each year when she went up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.

> Then Eli would bless Elkanah and his wife and say, "May the LORD repay you with children by this woman for the loan that she made to the LORD," and then they would return to their home.

> Now the boy Samuel continued to grow both in stature and in favor with the LORD and with the people.

[1 Sam 2.18-20, 26; NRSVue]

## Jesus in the temple

That last line is very similar to the last line of today's Gospel reading about the boy Jesus among the doctors of the Law. Like Samuel's parents, Jesus' parents would dutifully go up to the yearly sacrifice. The difference is that they didn't leave him there, except one year they accidentally did! Have you ever left a child somewhere? It's not the sort of thing one likes to admit. I remember going very close to leaving my daughter Isabella on a crowded New York subway platform as we struggled to get on the train with Joshie and his pram. Isabella was about eight at the time. It still gives me the horrors to think about it.

Imagine the horror of Mary and Joseph when they realised after a day of travelling that their boy wasn't with them or their relatives! They would have been in a state of panic from then until they found him three days later.

There he was, talking to the doctors of the Law. His mother said,

> Why have you treated us like this? Your father and I were beside ourselves while we were searching for you.

Where do you think Luke got these details? I think he got them straight from Mary. It's got the ring of someone who was there, and you can hear their concern. I imagine that Jesus' answer didn't help matters:

> Didn't you know that I must attend to my Father's business?

[Luke 2.48-49 USC]

I wonder what Joseph thought of that? Was Jesus implying he wasn't running his business right? That's how I would have taken it. Luke just says that his parents didn't understand what he was talking about.

As for the interrupted discussion with the doctors of the Law, Luke says:

> All who listened to him were astonished at his intelligence and his responses.

[Luke 2.47 USC]

These people were experts in the Law of Moses and they were astonished at his responses. It might have been impressive to meet a twelve year old who could recite the Scripture, but they would have seen that before. Here was something else, an inspired voice, what we hear in its fully developed form in teaching like the Sermon on the Mount. 

Jesus went home with Mary and Joseph. Mary treasured these things in her heart. In the following years, Jesus, like Samuel before him,

> progressed in wisdom and in physical stature and in favour with God and with the people.

[Luke 2.52 USC]

## Dressed for action

The other New Testament reading for today is from Colossians. Paul wrote this letter to Christians living in a town named [Colossae](https://library.biblicalarchaeology.org/article/colossae-colossal-in-name-only/) in what was then Asia Minor and is now Turkey, some time around 58 AD.

Paul tells the people there,

> Make sure that no-one takes you captive through philosophy and futile deceit, following human tradition, following the rudiments of the world instead of Christ. After all, it's in him that all the fullness of the deity resides in bodily form.

[Col 2.8-9 USC]

Rather than going back to the old ways of human religion, he uses the analogy of taking off old clothes and putting on new ones to encourage the Colossians to seek the things above, where Christ is seated at God's right hand. Colossae was known for a special kind of wool, so Paul's analogy is apt. He goes on to say,

> So then, as God's hand-picked people, holy and dearly loved, dress yourselves in deeply felt compassion, kindness, humility, self-effacement, and patience. Put up with one another and, if anyone has grounds for complaint against another, forgive one another; just as the Lord also forgave you, so you, too, are to forgive. Over all these, put on love, which binds everything together perfectly.

[Col 3.12-14 USC]

It's hard to find a more succinct description of the Way of Christ. Paul goes on to say, *let Christ's peace be the arbitrator in your hearts* then concludes this sublime passage with these words:

> And anything you happen to do, whether in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.

## An ancient reader

We have just survived another silly season. There was a generalized madness of reindeers, elves, Christmas trees, high prices, frenzies and consumptions.

Where was Jesus? 

What was that thing I said I would return to later on? Ah yes, the church reader. There was once a church reader in a place called Myra on the coast of Asia Minor. (Paul himself once stopped at Myra -- see [Acts 27.5](https://www.crosswire.org/study/parallelstudy.jsp?key=Acts+27%3A5#cv).) The reader's name was Nicholas. He was born around 270 AD, about 200 years after Paul wrote to the church in Colossae, which was about 200 km to the north. Nicholas seems to have been something of a boy priest. Here is an extract from an online article about him:

> St. Nicholas, also known as "Nikolaos of Myra," was a fourth century saint and Greek bishop of Myra. Nicholas was born in Asia Minor in the Roman Empire as an only child to Christian parents... "He was exceedingly well brought up by his parents and trod piously in their footsteps. The child, watched over by the church, enlightened his mind and was encouraged in his thirst for sincere and true religion." Both of his parents tragically died during an epidemic when he was a young man, leaving him well off, but to be raised by his uncle -- the Bishop of Patara. Nicholas was determined to devote his inheritance to works of charity, and his uncle mentored him as a reader and later ordained him as a presbyter (or priest).

> An opportunity soon arose for St. Nicholas and his inheritance. A citizen of Patara had lost all his money, and needed to support his three daughters who could not find husbands because of their poverty. Nicholas became informed of this, and thus took a bag of gold and threw it into an open window of the man's house in the night. Here was a dowry for the eldest girl and she was soon duly married. At intervals Nicholas did the same for the second and the third; at the last time the father was on the watch, recognized his benefactor and overwhelmed Nicholas with his gratitude.

> Coming to the city of Myra when the clergy and people of the province were in session to elect a new bishop, St. Nicholas was indicated by God as the man they should choose. This was during the time of persecutions in the beginning of the fourth century and "as he [Nicholas] was the chief priest of the Christians of this town and preached the truths of faith with a holy liberty, the divine Nicholas was seized by the magistrates, tortured, then chained and thrown into prison with many other Christians. But when the great and religious Constatine, chosen by God, assumed the imperial diadem of the Romans, the prisoners were released from their bonds and with them the illustrious Nicholas, who when he was set at liberty returned to Myra."

There are many other stories about Nicholas and many miracles are attributed to him. In one he did a Jesus, telling the wind and waves to be quiet thus saving the ship he was on and its occupants. It seems that Nicholas continues to do miracles. Recently a million people in Russia lined up to see one of his bones (a rib) that was sent to Russia after a meeting between Pope Francis and the Orthodox Patriarch Kirill. This was the first meeting between the heads of the Catholic and Orthodox Churches since the schism of 1054 AD. Nicholas is venerated by all flavours of Christianity. He is the patron saint of Russia and Greece. He is also the patron saint of sailors, merchants, archers, repentant thieves, children, brewers, pawnbrokers, toymakers, unmarried people, and students.

What does all this have to do with today's readings? Here was a boy priest who grew in stature with God and people. He clothed himself with love and did not neglect to do good and to share. It seems that God was pleased with his sacrifices.

Amen

## Acknowledgments

Bible verses are from the New Revised Standard Version Update Edition (NRSVue, 2021), Jerusalem Bible (JB, 1966), and Richard K. Moore's translation of the New Testament into Australian English titled *Under the Southern Cross* (USC, 2014). The image of Jesus with the teachers is by [Frank Wesley](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frank_Wesley), an Indian-Australian artist born of a Christian family of Hindu and Muslim descent. The extract on Saint Nicholas is from [Catholic Online](https://www.catholic.org/saints/saint.php?saint_id=371).
